Section firmware (#13)
3mdeb/verified-boot: verified_boot_main.md

Protecting the firmware's flash chip from being modified, on the other hand,
is a precaution that might save the device from being compromised or tampered
with. Making the chip read only should make it impossible to add an untrusted
component to the boot process. Such protections only apply to modifying the
flash chip via the integrated programmer that can be operated by the CPU
and the software running on it. They don't protect the flash chip from being
reprogrammed by physically connecting an external programmer device to it.

On the example of Intel platforms, the supported protections are described
in the chipset Platform Controller Hub datasheets and consist of a couple
mechanisms:

- Flash Descriptor Master Region [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-2-1]
  - Defines the structure of firmware regions
  - Controls the read and write access to the regions
  - The *Master* [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-2-1] of the region can access it
    no matter the access setting
  - The CPU is the *Master* of the BIOS region, so this mechanism
    is not enough to protect the BIOS from malicious software
- Global Write Protection [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-5-1]

>   - Blocks writes to the whole SPI chip

Reviewer: The proper explanation would be that it doesn't let the SPI flash to be software-writable (set the write protect disabel bit) by firing an SMI whenever software attempts to make the flash writable. Then the SMI handler may clear the write protect disable bit back if write protection was disabled by an unauthorized entity

Author: I've changed the section in favor of this comment here, but haven't linked the compare to the conversation https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/5e2a93a71147940e1664f0dd5ae716d93d3f2ebe..335ccb027bc5b2eff7f7a49d6a9d6eb07da564c5

I suppose the conversation was resolved because to that change

### Non-functional requirements

## 3. Firmware

### Implementations of verified boot

Booting the system is a multistep process that might include an arbitrary
sequence of components. In order to perform a verified boot of the system,
every firmware and software component ran after the Root of Trust has to be
verified and verify the next component in the chain. Launching a component that
does not implement verified boot and passes execution to unverified code
breaks the chain of trust and poses a security risk.

#### Legacy

Legacy BIOS firmware is highly implementation dependent. It is common
for BIOS firmware to implement a subset of BIOS interrupt calls[^wikipedia_bic]
compatible with the ones used in the first IBM PCs, but it is not required.

Not every BIOS firmware implements verified boot and the implementations are not
guaranteed to have a compatible API or ABI. Some common open-source non-UEFI
BIOSes that work towards verified boot include:

> - `coreboot` - implements verified boot, calls the feature `vboot` [^coreboot_vboot]

Reviewer: implements measured boot too
https://doc.coreboot.org/security/vboot/measured_boot.html

Reviewer: Also has a verified boot mechanism called CBFS verification

Author: This section is about verified boot though. Maybe it would be better to mention it in the page about measured boot instead?

Author: I can't find a source for the CBFS verification other than a mention in the coding style document https://doc.coreboot.org/contributing/coding_style.html and that it appears in the config files as `CONFIG_CBFS_VERIFICATION`. Do you think it is worth mentioning this?

Author: Adding the mention that coreboot also implements measured boot to make it consistent, as measured boot support is mentioned for Slim Bootloader https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/8a66e6d%5E..8a66e6d

Reviewer: I think this is the best we can get: https://github.com/coreboot/coreboot/blob/35933e40be83667bb2d1e1de9e9618cd690c6124/src/lib/Kconfig.cbfs_verification#L11

There is no documentation about this feature, indeed.

Author: Thanks!
https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/26bd3ea%5E..26bd3ea

[^seabios_1ah]: https://mail.coreboot.org/pipermail/seabios/2011-April/001609.html
[^skiboot_libstb]: https://open-power.github.io/skiboot/doc/stb.html
[^Slim_security]: https://slimbootloader.github.io/security/index.html

#### UEFI

The UEFI specification defines the UEFI Secure Boot protocol[^UEFI_SB] as a security
mechanism that can be used as a part of verified boot process. The protocol
allows to verify the authenticity and integrity of UEFI drivers as well as
the operating system before the hand-off.

What makes Secure Boot special is that the process is very well documented
in the UEFI specification. Different UEFI BIOS implementations can differ
in how exactly it is implemented and whether additional functionalities
are provided, but thanks to the common specification, and standard set of UEFI
Services, any UEFI compatible Operating Systems can be easily booted on any
UEFI BIOS implementation.

UEFI Secure Boot causes some controversy[^Wikipedia_uefi_criticism] due to the fact that most hardware
comes with Microsoft keys enrolled, and that most firmware and operating systems

> come signed using them. The Debian Wiki [^Debian_sb] explains how this fact,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
come signed by those keys. The Debian Wiki [^Debian_sb] explains how this fact,
```

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/c487af597a9e9ab4b05c4fcebdc30e0d8515abb0..c9821c180a7a155be94c4c234ee896a626ab10aa#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L93-R93

Changing the BIOS firmware settings via its UI is the easiest way to affect
the firmware and it's security. It requires next to no technical knowledge
or preparations.

Typically two factors are used to authenticate changes in firmware settings
using the UI:
- Physical presence - Because the UI is presented on a screen and the inputs
are incoming from an external device it is often safe to assume that a person,
not malicious code, is accessing the settings, and so the changes may be treated
as authenticated as done intentionally by a user.
- BIOS Password - In scenarios where a higher security is required most BIOS
firmware implementations[^Dasharo_password][^MSI_password][^system76_password][^Gigabyte_password] provide a way to set up a password which protects the settings
from being changed by an unathorized user.

<!--

https://docs.dasharo.com/dasharo-menu-docs/overview/#user-password-management

http://osresearch.net/FAQ/#why-use-linux-instead-of-vboot2
> by moving the verification into the boot scripts we’re able to have a much
  flexible verification system and use more common tools like PGP to sign firmware stages

 -->

>  [^Dasharo_password]: Dasharo menu overwier, User password management, https://docs.dasharo.com/dasharo-menu-docs/overview/#user-password-management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 [^Dasharo_password]: Dasharo menu overview, User password management, https://docs.dasharo.com/dasharo-menu-docs/overview/#user-password-management
```

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/c487af5%5E..c487af5#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L154-R154

 [^MSI_password]: MSI DT BIOS Manual, under "Security", https://www.msi.com/support/technical_details/DT_BIOS_Manual
 [^system76_password]: System76 Technical Documentation, Security, https://tech-docs.system76.com/models/addw1/setup-specs.html#security
 [^Gigabyte_password]: Gigabyte BIOS Setup User's Guide, Chapter 1, under "Security", https://download.gigabyte.com/FileList/Manual/server_manual_r121-x30_bios_e_1.0.pdf

### Firmware protections against changing firmware's flash chip

The processes of verified boot and measured boot can be used to detect that

> the system's security might have been compromited and react to it accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the system's security might have been compromised and react to it accordingly.
```

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/c487af5%5E..c487af5#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L162-R162

Protecting the firmware's flash chip from being modified, on the other hand,

> is a precaution that might save the device from being compromited altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a precaution that might save the device from being compromised or tampered with.
```

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/c487af5%5E..c487af5#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L165-R166

Making the chip read only should make it impossible to add an untrusted
component to the boot process. Such protections only apply to modifying the
flash chip via the integrated programmer that can be operated by the CPU
and the software running on it. They don't protect the flash chip from being
reprogrammed by physically connecting an external programmer device to it.

On the example of Intel platforms, the supported protections are described
in the chipset Platform Controller Hub datasheets and consist of three
mechanisms:

- Flash Descriptor Master Region [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-2-1]
  - Defines the structure of firmware regions
  - Controls the read and write access to the regions
  - The *Master* [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-2-1] of the region can access it
    no matter the access setting
  - The CPU is the *Master* of the BIOS region, so this mechanism
    is not enough to protect the BIOS from malicious software

> - Global Write Protection [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-5-1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SMM BIOS Write Protection [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-5-1]
```

Nowadays it is called SMM BWP (Syste management Mode BIOS Write Protection). And it only blocks write to BIOS region in descriptor mode.

Author: @miczyg1
The linked document calls it Global Write Protection though. Could you recommend some newer documentations where this is described? The PCHs of the newer 600,700,800 chipsets doesn't seem to say anything about flash protections other than specifying some flag registers offsets

Reviewer: In the newest chipsets it is also called EISS (Enable in SMM.STS), but I also have troubles to find the info...

I will try to look for some good references then.

Reviewer: EISS is here 
https://edc.intel.com/content/www/us/en/design/publications/800-series-chipset-family-platform-controller-hub-pch-volume-2/bios-control-bios-spi-bc-offset-dc/

SMM BWP is here : https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/datasheets/9-series-chipset-pch-datasheet.pdf (section 12.1.33 BIOS_CNTL register)

From what I understood the Global Write Protection refers to the SMI caused by Lock Enable bit and WPD bit. it work in conjunction with EISS/SMM_BWP. So we need something like this:

```
- Global Write Protection [^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-5-1]
  - SMM BIOS Write Protection [^Intel_series_9_pch_12-1-33], nowadays known as Enable InSMM.STS (EISS) [^Intel_800_series_pch]
```

Author: @miczyg1 

Interesting that the 9 series PCH describes the Global SMI Write Protection without going into details on how it works / how to use it, then later describes how to use a protection mechanism not mentioned before (SMM BWP), that works similarly, but only protects the BIOS region.

From what I understand from the description, the Global protection should somehow be controlled using the BIOS Control Register. Specifically the "Write Protected" bit, but this exact name does not appear anywhere else in the document.

You said that the "Global Write Protection" is now called "SMM BWP", yet both names are mentioned in the same PCH and described as working differently. Are you sure that SMM BWP replaces the Global Write Protection and they are not two related mechanisms? Is there no way of locking the whole SPI chip?

Author: From what I understand as of now I'd describe it as two mechanisms as I can't find a correlation with the mechanisms implemented using the BIOS Control Register and the Global Write Protection described briefly in section 5.26.5.3 

https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/a8d82e5%5E..a8d82e5

Reviewer: > You said that the "Global Write Protection" is now called "SMM BWP", yet both names are mentioned in the same PCH and described as working differently. Are you sure that SMM BWP replaces the Global Write Protection and they are not two related mechanisms? Is there no way of locking the whole SPI chip?

It does not replace it but complements it, thus the nested relation in my suggestion.

The whole locks and protections are so complex that a mere datasheet will not fully explain to you how to use it. Some things have to be tried in practice. The old OST tries to do it: https://opensecuritytraining.info/IntroBIOS_files/Day2_03_Advanced%20x86%20-%20BIOS%20and%20SMM%20Internals%20-%20SPI%20Flash%20Protection%20Mechanisms.pdf

Author: Right, I think I understand now.

Will that be good? https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/5e2a93a%5E..5e2a93a

<!--
https://eclypsium.com/blog/firmware-security-realizations-part-3-spi-write-protections/
https://opensecuritytraining.info/IntroBIOS_files/Day2_03_Advanced%20x86%20-%20BIOS%20and%20SMM%20Internals%20-%20SPI%20Flash%20Protection%20Mechanisms.pdf
https://nixhacker.com/analyse-bios-protection-against-uefi-rootkit/
https://cdrdv2-public.intel.com/743835/743835-004.pdf, section 27.1.1
 -->

[^Intel_series_9_pch]: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/datasheets/9-series-chipset-pch-datasheet.pdf
[^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-2-1] Intel 9 Series Chipset PCH, section 5.26.2.1: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/datasheets/9-series-chipset-pch-datasheet.pdf
[^Intel_series_9_pch_5-26-5-1] Intel 9 Series Chipset PCH, section 5.26.2.1: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/datasheets/9-series-chipset-pch-datasheet.pdf

### Intel Boot Guard / AMD Platform Secure Boot

<!-- TODO?? Because the technologies are more or less equivalent, maybe it's
better to describe what they are about here and then show the differences
in naming in the two sections -->

The two technologies are mostly equivalent and serve the purpose of:

> - Verifying and Measuring the BIOS firmware

Reviewer: AMD PSB does not perform measurements.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/89b78ad%5E..89b78ad#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L204-R234

- Hardware implementations of basic cryptography operations
- A small read-only code for verifying the firmware

While similar in essence, Intel Boot Guard and AMD Platform Secure Boot use
different naming for equivalent steps and elements of the technologies.

#### Intel Boot Guard

Intel Boot Guard[^Intel_introduction_to_key_usage] is a technology that
implements the RTM and the RTV in hardware.
The hardware-based RTV works by verifying the initial part of the firmware
called the `Initial Boot Block (IBB)` using the `Authenticated Code Module (ACM)`
code embedded in the CPU by the manufacturer. The IBB is verified using the OEM
keys, that are saved in the CPU registers and can be fused to make them
permamently read-only. The IBB is the second link of the CTV and continues
to extend it by verifying the rest of the BIOS firmware.

[^Intel_introduction_to_key_usage]: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/software-security-guidance/resources/key-usage-in-integrated-firmware-images.html

#### AMD Platform Secure Boot

The AMD Platform Secure Boot[^AMD_PSB], also called AMD Hardware Validated Boot[^AMD_HVB] on data

> center processors, provides the Hardware RTM and RTV thanks to the

Reviewer: HVB is the old name of PSB. Nowadays, PSB is the official name and is used everywhere. Quite weird to see HVB used on data center whitepaper,  especially that it is mixed with attestation and virtualized environments. Almost like it is something else. I would simply write:

```

The AMD Platform Secure Boot[^AMD_PSB] (formerly known as AMD Hardware Validated Boot[^AMD_HVB]), provides
```

> `AMD Secure Processor (ASP)`, which is logically isolated from the CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`AMD Secure Processor (ASP)` (formerly known as Platform Security Processor - PSP), which is logically isolated from the CPU.
```

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/77a1190%5E..77a1190#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655R235-R236

The ASP executes the `ASP boot loader code` - a read only code embedded within
the ASP, which verifies an initial part of the firmware called the `Secure Loader (SL)`
using keys fused into the CPU. Verifying the SL makes it the second link of the CTV.
The Secure Loader then extends the
Chain of Trust for Verification by verifying the rest of the BIOS firmware.

[^AMD_HVB]: https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/epyc-business-docs/white-papers/5th-gen-amd-epyc-processor-architecture-white-paper.pdf
[^AMD_PSB]: https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/products/processors/ryzen/7000/ryzen-pro-7000-security-whitepaper.pdf
<!-- - Platform Security Processor (PSP)
- https://doc.coreboot.org/soc/amd/psp_integration.html

> - https://ioactive.com/exploring-amd-platform-secure-boot/ - might be great,

Reviewer: While it has quite correct info, there is a lot of hex prepping there.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/89b78ad%5E..89b78ad#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L250-L257
